---
id: 0
title: "Differential Privacy"
subtitle: "What is it and why is it needed"
date: "25.04.2023"
---

### Why other approaches to privacy not enough?

Most of the approaches used for privacy protection are susceptible to certain attacks. For example, Homogeneity attack is one of the attacks on k-Anonymity. Homogeneity attack allows adversaries to obtain the exact values on the sensitive attributes for their targets without having to re-identify them from released data. All these approaches to privacy do not provide the privacy guarantee. But DP provides robust privacy guarantees against a wide range of privacy attacks. It makes sure that the data subject is not affected by their entry or participation in a database, while maximizing utility/data accuracy (as opposed to random/empty outputs) for queries to a database. It guarantees that the impact on the participant of a study is the same independent of whether or not he was in the study. It is the conclusions reached in the study that affect the participant, not his presence or absence in the data set. 

### How DP protects privacy?
Differential Privacy is basically a method of protecting the privacy of individuals when their data is collected and analyzed. While managing a sensitive database, we want to ensure that the adversary does not learn the confidential (sensitive) data from the statistics of data. Differential Privacy makes it harder for an adversary to breach privacy. It adds noise to the ground truth of queries to a database. DP makes sure that the output of two neighbouring databases after querying the database is pretty much the same. Two databases, $`x`$ and $`x'`$ are called neighbouring databases if they differ in the data of a single individual. DP makes sure that the observed output of a query does not reveal which of $`x`$ or $`x'`$ was the input database. 

### Formal definition of Differential Privacy
We say that a mechanism $`M`$ satisfies differential privacy if for all neighbouring databases $`x`$ and $`x'`$, and all possible outputs $`S`$, 
	$`Pr[M(x)=S] \le e^\epsilon Pr[M(x')=S]`$
The mechanism is ε-differentially private in such a case. ε in the above definition is called privacy budget. How is ε related to levels of privacy? If ε is small, the mechanism provides very similar outputs when given similar inputs which implies higher levels of privacy. But if ε is large, the mechanism provides less similar outputs and therefore, lesser privacy.

For any pair of databases, we cannot gain more than a small amount of probabilistic information about a single individual. When an individual is added or removed from the database, all possible outputs of the mechanism can appear with similar probability. 

### How to achieve DP?

Easiest way to achieve DP for a query is to add random noise to its answer. It is obtained by 
1. Computing a function F of the data,
2. Adding some noise to the result.

The noise must be large enough to hide an individual contribution so as to satisfy the definition of differential privacy but not so much that the result becomes too noisy to be useful. But for some functions F, an individual contribution can change the true result more than for others functions. That concept is captured by sensitivity: the higher the possible change, the higher the sensitivity. The sensitivity of a function F is the amount F’s output changes when its input changes by 1. The amount of noise necessary to ensure differential privacy for a given query depends on the sensitivity of the query. The sensitivity of a function captures the magnitude by which a single individual’s data can change the function in the worst case. Higher the change, higher the sensitivity. And typically, to get ε-differential privacy with a fixed ε, you have to add more noise when the sensitivity is larger (to compensate). 

